Okay,
I think I'm going to start off this talk.
So I'm Chris Niederauer.
I am a senior 3D graphics software
engineer in the OpenGL team at Apple,
and I'm going to be talking today
about maximizing your performance
of your OpenGL applications
on the Mac OS X platform.
So, in introduction, what I'm going to be
talking about in this talk,
I'm going to be talking about basically
moving your applications code,
your OpenGL usage, into modern API.
And as part of this,
I'm going to be talking about how
to basically optimize your vertex
and your texture throughput.
And then I'm also going to
go over basically how to find
bottleneck and the pipeline,
the OpenGL pipeline.
So the main point I want to make today
is that there's always a fast path,
and I'm going to hopefully
tell you how to get there.
So part of getting there is
knowing which tools to use,
I mean,
the performance tools that we have.
And Apple provides a really great
suite of some tools that can help you
basically pinpoint where the problems
may be in your application and maximize
your performance on our platform.
So the first tool, OpenGL Profiler,
is a tool that lets you
basically look at all of the
OpenGL state in your application.
You can set breakpoints, look at state.
You can also...
Get statistics like the amount of time
that's being spent in certain functions.
It's a very useful tool.
The second tool we're going to go
over is the OpenGL Driver Monitor.
And this gives you more specifics
about the GPU such as the amount of
time the CPU is waiting for the GPU.
Also, it tells you how much
free VRAM is available,
things like that.
And then finally, there's Shark.
And I'm not going to be
going over Shark today.
But there's a lot of great
documentation on that on the web.
And basically,
that tool lets you pinpoint hot
spots in your source code of where
you can hopefully improve the
performance of your application.
So some key concepts about OpenGL.
OpenGL is a state machine.
And what this means is that
you've got a state that you set.
You do multiple draw calls.
And throughout those draw calls,
your state will remain
constant through those calls.
And you have to change
the state at some point.
And when you're changing the state,
there's actually an
overhead to doing that.
And so basically, I wanted to say today,
try and minimize the amount of times
that you're changing the state.
Because it is overhead,
it has to be done, yes,
but try and minimize it.
And so you do this by grouping
similar state draw calls together.
And I also want to mention that if you're
going to be changing a lot of state,
there's also objects
can encapsulate state.
So you should be using objects like if
you're changing a lot of vertex pointers,
vertex color texture
pointers and whatnot,
you can use the vertex array
objects extension and also frame
buffer objects or another state,
another object that encapsulates state.
One of the most important
things about this talk,
however, is the fact that OpenGL acts
in a client-server model.
And basically what this means is
that you're going to be having
to balance the CPU and the
GPU usage of your applications.
And one way of doing this is,
since OpenGL is a pipeline,
round-tripping can be expensive.
So doing like gets of both
data as well as state can
cause stalls in this pipeline.
So what we want to do is we
want to maximize asynchronicity.
So here we see the most common
way that we might think about
OpenGL as a client-server model
is between the CPU and the GPU.
And basically,
we're trying to always send data one way.
In the OpenGL pipeline,
it works most efficiently when
you're trying to send data one way.
But OpenGL also is a client-server
model between your application
and the OpenGL API itself.
Doing gets and so forth will cause
potential stalls in this pipeline,
especially important with the
new multi-threaded OpenGL engine
on Mac OS X Leopard and
available on the Mac Pros.
So what is a multi-threaded
OpenGL engine?
It's basically a switch you can
set that will automatically start
running the OpenGL engine on a
separate thread than your main thread.
And what this allows you to do is
if you're using asynchronous calls,
maximizing the use of your pipeline,
you can basically get very large
performance increases simply by turning
on this multi-threaded OpenGL engine.
So I was saying to take advantage
of the OpenGL multi-threaded engine,
the most important part to
that is basically maintaining
asynchronous behavior,
trying to keep the client's server
model in a straightforward pipeline.
So obviously we've been
saying past forever,
we always have been telling developers,
never call GL Finish.
There's no reason whatsoever that your
application should be calling GL Finish.
And then as part of that,
GL Flush as well is usually unnecessary.
So there's only select cases where
you want to be using geoflush.
And if you don't know that
you're supposed to be using it,
then you probably are not supposed
to be using it at that point.
Basically, whenever you call geoflush,
it's going to cause a
stall in the pipeline.
GeoGet and other calls like that
where you're trying to get backstate
will also cause synchronization
between OpenGL and your application.
And so what you want to try
and do is shadow as much
state as you can when you can.
And if you do the shadowing,
you don't necessarily have
to do these gets back.
So only use GeoGet in the cases
where you can't shadow state,
such as when you are looking up the
extension string for the first time on
your video cards that you may be using.
Also, to maximize asynchronous behavior,
there are points at which you do
need to synchronize using fences or
occlusion query or things like that.
So when you are going to be
using something like fences
or occlusion query testing,
what you want to do is
you want to try and defer,
use the most time that you can to
defer the actual set and the test.
If you do this, you're able to,
the more time that you
utilize outside of this set,
between the set and this test,
the more time that,
the less time that you'll likely
stall the pipeline by doing so.
Let's see.
Then there's also, again,
I'm going to mention, you know,
state setting in general takes overhead,
so trying to avoid that.
Again, group similar state
draws to cause together.
And if you do this,
you're basically optimizing
for the multi-threaded engine.
And...
Hopefully you'll get a
big benefit out of that.
So later I'm going to go over how to
do dynamic vertex and texture data,
and then I'm also going to go
over frame buffer readback,
how to do that in an efficient
and asynchronous method.
So I was talking about call overhead.
Every time you call into OpenGL,
there's a slight amount of overhead
that has to occur because simply you're
calling a function at that point.
But there's also a little bit more
that's involved in the process where
it has to look up the current context.
So one way you can work around
this is you can use macros.
So by simply including
CGL macro and Glue macro,
if you're using Glue code,
you can avoid this overhead.
And so I recommend that you use these.
Also, make sure that you move,
try and use the OpenGL calls
that move a lot of data with
the fewest number of calls.
So for instance,
you want to use drawRays or
drawRangeElements with VBO as
opposed to doing immediate mode
calls where you have GL begin,
GL vertex, GL vertex, GL vertex, GL end.
Obviously, it's a lot easier to just
call one GL drawRays call.
And secondly, as an example, the EXT.
GPU program parameters extension,
which is rather new,
allows you to upload multiple
parameters for a fragment program
or vertex program in a single call.
And the same API, equivalent API is
available already for GLSO.
And then, again,
I can't stress this enough,
try and group your similar
state objects together.
So, vertex buffer objects.
I wanted to go over vertex performance.
And basically, for getting the most out
of your vertex performance,
you want to be using,
instead of compiled vertex arrays,
you want to be using
vertex buffer objects.
And what vertex buffer objects are,
are a way to encapsulate,
basically an efficient method
for uploading the vertex data.
And so I have an example here
of using vertex buffer objects.
Hopefully,
a lot of you are already using this,
and so probably very
familiar with this code.
But we have in this code sample,
we just have a,
we bind to this vertex buffer object.
We say how big it is with
the buffer data call,
and then we map it.
And at this map,
we can then put in some data in there,
unmap it, and then draw with that.
So Apple Vertex Array Range is
what we used to be saying
that you should be using,
and that is a good way
to push vertex data up.
However,
it does cause synchronization points
in the multi-threaded OpenGL engine,
and so we're recommending now that
you switch to vertex buffer objects.
And so one last thing about
vertex buffer objects.
I wanted to make sure that you guys know
that if you know that you're going to be,
you want to make sure that you
provide the minimal hints that
you can for these buffer objects
when you're allocating them.
So if you know you're going to be
only reading a vertex buffer object,
as opposed to reading and writing it,
then do map it as read-only.
And if you know, similarly,
if you know that your vertex
data is only going one way,
you want to be using geostatic
draw rather than draw.
So you can do geostatic copy and
so forth with those parameters.
[Transcript missing]
So I wanted to turn it
over to Dave Springer here,
who's going to go and show some
examples of using vertex buffer objects.
All right.
Thanks, Chris.
I'm going to show a
quick demo of using VBOs.
And... What happened?
Okay.
I, uh, no rabbits were harmed in this.
I found these,
and I saw these rabbits in the hay,
and I won't tell you what I was doing,
but these...
This is not a shader.
So what you're looking at here
is every frame I'm updating all
the colors at all the vertices.
So this is immediate mode
and you've got a GL begin,
GL color, GL vertex, GL normal,
texture coordinate.
So that's what's happening here.
No shaders involved.
Immediate mode,
I'm getting about 26 frames per second.
I don't know if you guys can
see that number up there.
Let me flip on CGL macros.
And you'll see that I do get a
slight increase because I'm not
making those function calls.
We're going through about, we figured,
a million or so GL calls to render
these four rabbits because there's
the number of vertices and so on.
So that's with CGL macros on.
Now, with VBOs,
I jumped to about 110 frames per second.
So huge, huge increase, like 5x.
So that's the advantage
of using the VBOs.
Again,
I've taken the static parts of the data,
pushed it all onto the card using VBOs,
and then I've taken the
dynamic part of the data,
the color,
which I'm refreshing every frame,
and that's another separate VBO.
And so that's how this is working.
And you can see the kind of
performance improvement we're getting.
Also, there's a CPU monitor down here,
and you can see the difference
in what's going on in my
balance between CPU and GPU.
When I'm in immediate mode,
you can see that the CPU is,
one of them anyway, is pegged.
So it's working really,
really hard all the time,
forming these commands,
setting the buffers down,
so on and so forth.
When I flip over to VBOs,
my CPU usage drops almost to nothing.
So it's showing me that
I really am offloading.
everything onto the GPU to
render these rabbits.
So that means my CPU is freed
up to do a lot of other things.
Like I could do a physics
simulator and make the rabbits hop.
I don't have that in this demo,
but I could.
Okay, that's it.
Turn it back over to Chris.
Thanks, Dave.
So now that we've gone over
vertex performance and modern
API being vertex buffer objects,
I wanted to go over textures.
So optimizing texture throughput.
The four parts that I'm going
to go over are I'm going to
talk about using the fast,
you want to make sure that you're using
fast texture type and format pairs.
You want to minimize the number
of texture copies that you have
when you can by using like,
for instance,
using the Apple Texture Range and
Apple Client Storage Extensions.
And I'm going to go over a little
bit over our pixel buffer object and
API very similar to vertex buffer
objects but for textures instead.
And then after that,
I'm going to go over asynchronous,
basically speeding up your frame buffer
readback by doing it asynchronously.
So the format and type pairs with
textures are very important that
you pick something that is capable
by the hardware to try and get
the most performance out of it.
So I have here three examples of
texture type format pairs that
are supported by the hardware.
And so they are basically
BGRA with unsigned 8888 rev,
BGRA with short 1555 rev.
And for YCBR textures,
you need to use unsigned short 8888
either with or without the rev apple,
depending on your usage of it.
And I have a picture here
of the shark application.
And you can see here we basically did
a time profile of an application that
was not using one of these types.
And it just happened to be
going down a type that the
GPU was unable to deal with.
And so what we see in this case
is we see GLG process pixels.
And occurring at this point.
So we can get rid of this completely
by simply using one of these
texture type and format pairs.
So, second part about
optimizing texture format,
or textures, is texture performance,
is by trying to minimize the number
of texture copies that you are using.
So, using the normal OpenGL engine,
geotech image, and so forth,
in the Mac OS X implementation of OpenGL,
we actually keep around three
copies of the texture in addition
to potentially your fourth copy of
the texture held by the application.
And so,
by using some Apple-specific extensions,
we can get rid of two of
these copies very easily.
And basically,
you have it so that the application
and the VRAM are the only copies of it.
So, here, what we've done here,
and this is basically
showing what happens.
There's some sample code on the
developer webpage called Texture
Range that has an example of doing this.
I'm going to also show a little bit
more about this sample code later.
And basically, what it does is it's using
these three extensions,
Apple Client Storage,
Apple Texture Range,
and EXT Texture Rectangle.
And by using these three together,
we're able to get rid
of these extra textures.
So, how does this work?
Well, the Apple Client Storage extension
basically allows the application
to tell OpenGL that it is going to
keep around a copy of the textures.
That OpenGL can look at at any point.
So, this means that after
you call your tech image,
you have to keep your copy of the texture
in your application's memory around and
try and not modify it while the GPU is
using it or while OpenGL is using it.
Let's see.
So basically, that is different from the
normal behavior in that normally
when you call geotech image,
you can free your texture immediately
afterwards because of the fact
that OpenGL is making for you.
So that's what client storage does.
And then we have, in addition to that,
we have Apple Texture Range and
EXD Texture Rectangle.
And by using those two together,
we then get rid of the
OpenGL driver copy.
And here, in particular,
we have Apple Texture Range specified
with a storage cache tint.
And by using this cache tint,
this is telling it that
we want to copy in VRAM.
And we can actually get rid of this
copy as well and have it so that
the video card is texturing directly
from our system memory copy if we
were to replace that geostorage cache
tint with a geostorage shared tint.
So now that we're texturing from client
storage and using all those extensions,
we are going to have the issue
of now we need to maintain that
we're not modifying the texture
data while the OpenGL is using it.
So this means that we're going
to be potentially stalling
on our data synchronization.
So the way that we can get around
this is by double buffering our
data that's going through OpenGL.
And we will use the fences and
object testing as needed in order to
make sure that we're not modifying
this texture data while it's in use.
So here, again,
this is showing stuff from
the texture range sample code.
And here we have the CPU is
generating a texture and then
drawing it and basically drawing it
on the GPU and then modifying it for
a second frame and then drawing it.
And then drawing it again to the GPU.
And what we see here is that the
CPU is unable to modify the copy
of the texture at this point,
circled in red, because the GPU is still
using it at that point.
And so we basically get this stall in
the pipeline right here while as we wait,
we call geofinish object,
waiting on that texture object.
We wait until the GPU is done
and we have this huge stall here.
And also we get the stall on the GPU as
a result of that stall on the CPU.
So how do we get rid of this
synchronization or at least make sure
that it's as efficient as possible?
We simply double buffer it.
So here we see that we have the first
texture modifying it on the CPU,
drawing with it.
Second texture is modified
with it and drawn.
And at that point, we call finish object
on the first texture.
And the first texture is able to,
at that point, we've minimized the gap in
the pipeline at that point.
By deferring the gap.
By deferring that testing of
the fence until a later point.
And by double buffering,
we've filled in the gap
that was otherwise there.
So now I'm going to defer to Dave again.
And he's going to show an example of
texturing performance using texture
range and pixel buffer objects.
Okay.
What I have here is a demo that really
shows different texturing procedures.
Texturing performance is
really application specific.
So, your texture performance is
going to vary depending on how
you're actually using them.
There's no real one boilerplate
method for saying if you do this,
your textures will just always go faster.
It really depends on your usage.
Although,
I can tell you that nearly always
immediate mode will be the slowest.
So, here we are in immediate mode.
I'm uploading a new texture.
There's five frames
of--this is Danny's stove.
And we're uploading five
frames--five different textures,
one, two, three, four,
five in a tight loop like that.
So, this is immediate mode.
We're getting about 43 frames per second.
So, Chris talked about the
texture range cached.
attributes.
With that turned on,
my frames per second jumps to about 300,
and I'm also pushing about
1.3 gigabytes across the bus.
Now, what's happening here is
that I'm telling the GPU,
here's your texture bits.
Go ahead and render it.
I'm not going to touch them.
And it doesn't make those extra copies
that Chris was talking about earlier.
So this is pushing the
texture straight into VRAM.
Now, if I turn cached to shared,
I'm going to
You'll notice my frames per
second now jumps up again,
and I'm almost at the theoretical
limit of the throughput in megabytes
per second of the bus because what's
happening here is I'm telling the
GPU there's going to be one copy of this.
The GPU can access it directly,
and so can the CPU.
Now, what's interesting about the shared
attribute is that if you're making
a very small amount of accesses
to the texture across the bus,
you're going to get
huge performance wins.
So I've jumped up to
1,200 frames per second.
I'm at 5 gigabytes per
second across the bus.
But this is because I made
the texture really small.
So this is a 1K by 1K texture originally.
Now I'm grabbing about every, oh,
I don't know, 20th texel or something.
So I'm not really making a lot
of accesses across the bus.
So that's where this
method really shines.
The final method I want to
show you is static PBOs.
I happen to really like PBOs.
I didn't really know how to
do texture mapping very well
before I wrote this demo.
And let me tell you something,
the PBOs are a snap.
So if you guys haven't
played with PBOs yet,
I really recommend that you get
in there and do that because
they're easy to set up and use.
You get great performance wins.
And understanding where your texture
data is relative to the CPU and
the GPU and across the bus is easy.
So here we are, static PBO,
the contract I'm making between the
CPU and the GPU is here's your data,
GPU, I'm not going to modify it.
So I upload it all to the
GPU and the GPU just spins.
And again, I'm getting great performance,
500 frames.
So over here in Driver Monitor,
I just want to show this tool really fast
because this is a way for you to look at
what's happening with your texture data.
So if you're noticing that you're
getting texture performance problems,
Driver Monitor is a great tool
to help pinpoint where those are.
If I flip down to immediate mode,
You can see there's a green line there,
right here.
And this is the amount of texture
data that I'm slamming onto the GPU.
So this, you can see it jump.
It jumped right here when
I went to immediate mode.
Also,
the CPU right now is not doing its...
Idling waiting for the GPU.
So if I go now to static PBOs,
Here, I've got this drop in
texture page on data.
So I'm not slamming a lot of
texture data across the bus,
which is better for this particular case.
And again, guys,
this is really application specific.
So when you're going to do
your texture optimizations,
you need to be prepared
to really look into it.
There is no just boilerplate solution
to making your textures go faster.
But you always can make
your textures go faster,
depending on what your usage is.
That's it.
Turn it back over to Chris.
Thank you.
Thanks.
So now that we've just gone over how
to upload your textures pretty fast,
we still haven't gone over downloading,
so reading back the pixel
data from the video card.
So those of you familiar with
the old method of doing this,
using async read pixels,
will be happy to hear there's a
much easier way to do it just by
simply using pixel buffer objects.
And so using a vanilla geo read
is not the right thing to do.
This will cause a synchronization.
It will cause a stall, basically,
in that it stops everything until--
you can see in this line of source here
that we're calling geo read pixels.
And as soon as we enter
this line of source code,
we don't get back from OpenGL until
the pixel data has been read back.
So like I was talking about earlier,
you want to try and defer the amount
of time between your settings.
So if you're cutting your
testing of your fences,
and you want to do the same
thing with your read back,
and you can do this by
using pixel buffer objects.
So here with pixel buffer objects,
what I've done is I've bound
to a pixel buffer object.
I stated the size of the pixel
buffer object and told it that
I wanted a static read to say that
I was going to read this data back.
And then in the read pixels,
I pass it a offset into that pixel
buffer object instead of a pointer,
like we were doing before.
And we notice we don't synchronize
at this point with geo read pixels.
But instead,
we get time to do other work on the CPU,
such as physics or other types
of things that are unrelated
to this particular read back.
And then when we're
done with all our work,
we can go back,
ask when we need this data back,
we ask OpenGL to map that pixel
buffer object as read only.
And then we can get the
data out and map it.
And that's it.
It's pretty straightforward.
And it was a lot more complex.
asynchronous pixel readback before.
Yeah, so now that I've gone over
texture and vertex throughput,
I want to talk about finding
the bottleneck in your
application's performance.
So as I was saying earlier,
OpenGL is a pipeline.
And it's made up of certain parts.
And if you stall any one of
those parts of the pipeline,
you will cause your application
to slow down as a result of that.
So I'm going to go over,
trying to identify if that
bottleneck may be on the CPU,
if it's due to the bus bandwidth,
also if it's due to the
GPU vertex processing,
and finally,
if it's due to the fill rate of the GPU.
So I'm going to go over how
to identify all these things.
And basically, when you are trying to
identify these things,
there's two parts.
There's two ways of doing this.
Either you can try and change the
workload of that stage to minimize
the amount of work that it's doing,
lower the amount.
And if you see an increase in speed,
then you know that.
That's likely the bottleneck.
Conversely,
if you know that it does not change
the frame rate by lowering the
amount of work being done on a stage,
you can rule out that particular stage.
So first, CPU bound.
This tends to be pretty common
for a lot of the applications
that are being written these days.
So here, the way to identify if you've
got a CPU bound application
is pretty straightforward.
You can simply look at the CPU monitor,
for instance,
in Top or in Activity Monitor.
And you can basically see if you're
using 100% of the CPU at that point.
And another way you could do
it as well is by if you take
out some sort of processing
step that's unnecessary for the
OpenGL particulars of the application,
such as taking out, say, the sound.
If you see that your frame rate
goes up as a result of that,
then you're likely CPU bound.
So what's the trick to fixing this?
Well,
other than using Shark and trying to
optimize as much of your application,
and then also trying to follow the
steps I've been going over to try and
optimize your throughput with OpenGL,
what you want to try and
do now is probably paralyze
your work as much as you can.
So if you have things like the
sound engine or physics engine,
if you can offload those
onto other threads,
then do that.
Alternatively, you can try and offload
OpenGL onto another thread.
But do keep in mind that when you
offload OpenGL onto another thread,
OpenGL itself is not a thread-safe API.
So what this means, basically,
you can only access one context,
from one-- you can only access a
context from one thread at a time.
Doing otherwise would be a violation
of this and is not acceptable in the
OpenGL-- in OpenGL implementation.
So the way that you can work
around this if you do need to
use it for multiple threads,
but I don't recommend this
because it's very difficult,
is you can use a CGL lock
and unlock context API.
But here we have an
example of an application.
We see two CPUs here,
and in green we have the application,
the time being spent in application code,
and in blue we have OpenGL being
squished on that first CPU,
and we see that it's not, you know,
we've got an entire CPU there
that's not being utilized.
So what we simply do is have our
application try and offload some
of that work on another thread.
Here we have the main CPU doing
some work that doesn't have
anything to do with OpenGL,
and then it's synchronizing,
you see the green arrow pointing down,
it's synchronizing with another
thread that's doing the OpenGL work,
and then we call OpenGL from
that second thread,
and OpenGL gets a lot more time as well
as the application gets a lot more time.
We're just taking much more advantage
of the dual processors that we've
been shipping in our systems for,
almost six years, about six years.
So, alternatively, new to Leopard,
there's the multi-threaded engine.
So, the multi-threaded engine, you know,
as long as you can apply those
techniques I've been talking about,
try and maximize your
asynchronicity of the application
and the client-server model,
can hopefully get you some big wins.
But do keep in mind that
this will add more work.
You should only be doing this
on dual processor systems.
It would probably be slower on a
single processor system because of
the fact that it's doing more work.
But the reason this is so good
is that it's doing the work for
the synchronization for you,
and so you don't have
to do any of this stuff.
All you have to do is call a CGL set
parameter with a KCGL MP Engine.
And that turns it on.
And as I was saying,
this only works... Well,
this works really well with
some well-behaved applications.
So here we saw the application
was using only one CPU before.
And simply by flipping a switch,
we see now that OpenGL adds a little
bit of work on the first thread.
It moves the work that OpenGL was
doing on the first CPU is now
being done on the second CPU.
And we have a small little portion
on the first CPU that the application
is interfacing with that then
synchronizes with that second
thread automatically through OpenGL.
And all the application did was
call this one CGL set parameter and
turned on the multi-threaded engine.
So I wanted to give Dave a look
at-- he's going to show you how to
basically use the OpenGL Profiler
to see how your application performs
with the multi-threaded engine.
All right, thanks, Chris.
New for Leopard and
actually in your seed,
the DVD that you guys
got at the show here,
the version of Profiler has a new feature
which allows you to turn multi-threading
on and off right from Profiler.
So you don't have to do
anything to your app.
In fact, you can take somebody else's
app and see what happens.
So I'm going to do that right now.
Okay, so this is Doom 3.
I'm going to run it first
with multithreading off.
So this is just out-of-the-box Doom 3.
And what I'm going to do is run the time
demo because I really suck at Doom 3.
You don't want to watch
me play it up here.
That would be brutal.
What's happening here in this
demo is Doom renders about 2,000,
2,100 frames and then times it.
It has its own frame counter.
Profiler also has a frame counter
which is counting frames too.
But in this case,
we're just going to use Doom's built-in
frame counter to see what kind of
frame rate it thinks it's getting.
And, uh...
This again is on the
single-threaded engine.
OK, so 62 frames per second.
Is that legible to you guys up there?
While this was running,
you noticed the CPU monitor
as well was pegged.
So now what I'm going to do
is flip over to Profiler.
And to use this new feature,
what you have to do is-- as
with many things in Profiler,
you have to be stopped at a
breakpoint in order to change
any kind of state in the app,
which is only fair to the app.
I mean, really,
you don't want Profiler in there
mucking around with your app
while you're live changing states.
So it's better to stop at first,
then change the state.
So I'm going to stop the app
here at CGL flush drawable,
go down here to multi-threaded control,
say Force On.
Then I remove the breakpoint,
say Continue, and that's it.
Doom is now multi-threaded.
So let's see what happens.
I'm going to run that time demo again.
I think you can already see that
it looks like it's going faster.
The kind of speed-ups that we have been
seeing in apps where all we did was
do this kind of a trick with Profiler,
just go turn the multi-threading
on behind the scenes on it,
we're getting anywhere from 20 to
40%. And that's just a freebie.
So, you know, why not?
Chris has talked about some
different times when you
don't want multi-threading,
but here we're getting, boy,
that's hard to read,
88.5 frames per second, up from about 60.
So about a 40% increase
just by flipping a switch.
So that's it.
Thank you.
Thanks, Dave.
So as you saw, Doom 3, you know,
we just turned the switch on.
We didn't work with the developer at all,
and, you know, we're already seeing
a 20 to 40% increase.
If they were to follow some
of the synchronization,
asynchronicity stuff that
I've been talking about,
potentially we can get even
more performance out of it.
At least that's the hope.
I don't know, but we did the same thing
with World of Warcraft,
and we had a 90% increase after
working with the developer.
So it just shows that you can get
some big wins if you are CPU-bound
like Doom 3 and World of Warcraft are
just by simply turning on the switch.
So next part of the pipeline
I want to talk about is when you
get bound by the bus bandwidth.
So the way that you can identify
if your bus bandwidth is the
limitation of your pipeline,
you can basically try and
use smaller data sizes,
such as if you have large textures that
you're trying to send up to the GPU,
you can try sending up smaller textures
that are simply like one-by-one textures
as opposed to 1,000 by 1,000 textures and
see if that increases your frame rate.
If that does increase your frame rate,
then you know you're bus bandwidth bound.
So ways to address this,
use smaller data sets in general,
smaller textures, smaller vertex data,
that type of stuff.
Use shaders to generate your texture
and your vertex data when you can.
reduce your texture and vertex
uploads with data caching and VRAM.
So you can use the pixel buffer object
and vertex buffer object extensions to
basically say that you want to have a
static vertex buffer object and so forth.
Or with the texture range,
you tell it that you want it to be cached
and that will try and keep it in the
GPU as opposed to having a streaming
or dynamics texture or vertex data.
That would obviously be going
over the bus every single time.
And then conversely,
I wanted to mention if
you do see VRAM paging,
say running out of video memory,
the way that you want to address this
is by trying to reduce the amount
of data that's being cached in VRAM.
And you do this by using the stream
or the shared texture types instead
of the static and the cached ones.
I overheard this in the hallways.
The graphics bus is not a big truck.
It's a series of tubes.
Keep that in mind.
You know,
you can't just take everything at once.
It is limited.
So now that we're past the bus bandwidth,
let's take a look at the
GPU vertex transformation.
And so how do you address this,
or how do you identify this, excuse me?
You can try using some trivial
vertex shaders and see if
that increases your speed.
Alternatively,
you can try and submit less geometry.
But do remember that if you're
submitting less geometry,
you're potentially affecting other stages
of the pipeline such as your fill rate
if you're only drawing part of the cube.
You're not drawing the fill
rate as well at that point.
So that's a little bit
harder to figure out,
but that's a couple ways to identify it.
And ways to address it,
you can reduce the number of vertices.
And so you could, for instance,
you could use normal and bump mapping.
Or if you were at Nick's
talk earlier with GLSL,
you saw how ATI was using
parallax occlusion bump mapping
or ray tracing or something.
I don't know.
And, you know, with a single quad,
they were able to have these
tremendously high-resolution-looking...
that looked like they
were millions of vertices,
but it was really only a few.
Another technique, you know,
very common to Quake, Quake 3,
those types of games,
they use multipass rendering so that
they only submit the vertex data once.
And they use multiple textures and
do the multiple passes with only
one transformation of the vertices.
You can also try and reduce
the processing by your
vertex shader processing.
And finally,
by caching your vertices in VRAM,
you get faster access to those vertices.
So this will have a little bit less
stall on that vertex processing.
And then finally,
I want to go over the fill rate,
basically the drawing of
the pixels themselves.
And so one way to identify this,
the main way,
the easiest way to identify this
that I've found is simply by
trying to reduce the frame size.
And so if you reduce frame size,
you see the frame rate go up,
you know that your fill rate pounds.
So ways that you can address this,
first you want to try and
reduce the depth complexity,
both from an algorithmic
standpoint as well as,
well, for instance,
not using GeoClear unnecessarily.
For instance,
if you are drawing over the entire scene,
there's no reason to call
GeoClear with the color buffer
every frame since you're already
overriding it every frame anyways.
Another way is to call
the back-facing polygons.
You want to remove pixels as early
as possible from the pipeline.
So you can use the GeoAlphaThunk,
GeoDepthTest.
Using these sort of tests,
you can trivially reject fragments
before they've been actually doing
fragment processing or so forth
that may occur on those fragments.
Alpha testing is really useful,
by the way,
for if you have a texture that has
a lot -- say you have a texture of
a star where you have only stuff
in the center of the texture,
but then the outside is zero alpha
and not actually being drawn.
By using alpha test,
you can trivially reject the
outsides of those textiles and speeds
up the processing tremendously,
the fill rate at least.
Let's see.
You can reduce fragment processing,
shader processing, obviously,
if you have a complex shader.
Try and do something a
little bit more simple.
Again, reducing the frame size.
And this is especially important
if you have off-screen buffers.
Don't forget about those.
If you have an off-screen buffer that's
being rendered at a huge resolution,
and then you're only seeing it on,
you know, far away distance at, you know,
say you were to be using frame
buffer objects and rendering a tree,
you wouldn't want to be rendering
that at 1024 by 1024 if they're
only going to have those
billboards in the background at,
you know, 20 by 20.
Try and use a smaller texture for that.
and David Koehn.
And finally,
you want to use simple texture filtering.
As simple as you can get.
Like, for instance, don't use tri-linear
and isotropic filtering.
It's not free.
If it was free, it would probably be a
lot easier to pronounce.
So just gone over all the bottlenecks
that are very common to run into.
And there's a few more things I want
to go over before I end my talk.
So one of the points I want to
go over is software fallback.
Software fallback, it's not something you
want to be hitting.
It is a sink point for one thing.
And so what software fallback
is is when you're using,
say, a shader that is too complex
for a video card to support.
And you may actually fall back to
the software render at that point.
And then the software is doing
that rasterization for you because
the GPU was unable to do that,
fulfill that program at that point.
So you want to try and avoid this
by basically testing it on all your
supported graphics cards that you have.
And the way that you get around this is
you simply reduce your shader complexity
if you are falling back to software.
So for instance,
the noise function is not supported
by any hardware at this point,
this shipping.
And even though there's a noise
function specific to GLSL,
so whenever you call that noise function,
it has to unfortunately fall back to
software in order to support that.
So instead of using that
noise function call,
you can simply try and use a texture such
as we use in the GLSL showpiece example.
And by using noise textures instead of
-- like a texture to simulate the noise,
instead of just calling
noise from the shader itself,
we can reduce that complexity of
that shader to the point that it's
hopefully going to be accelerated
in the hardware at that point.
So then one other thing
I wanted to mention.
If you see GeoRenderer float
as a library name in Shark,
this means you're hitting the
software renderer at some point.
Also, one thing new to Leopard,
the Leopard Profiler version 4.0,
is that it's going to allow you to,
similar to how you can set a
breakpoint on if a GeoGet error is set,
you can set a breakpoint on if
you ever fall back to software.
I also wanted to mention a little
bit about framebuffer objects.
Hopefully you saw some of the really
cool demos that you could do this morning
at John Rososki's talk with Alex Eddy.
He wrote some really cool applications
using framebuffer objects.
Basically what they are is some simple,
intuitive, fast render-to-texture
methods for OpenGL.
It's similar to pbuffers,
not to be confused with
pixel buffer objects.
Pbuffers is an older way of creating
a context that has a drawable,
and so you can basically render
into a texture using pbuffers.
But framebuffer objects are an actual
new GL state piece that is cross-platform
and very simple to use that will do the
same thing without the complexities of,
for instance,
having multiple contexts because
it's simply a state object.
So because it is a state object,
it's not another context.
It also avoids requiring any
flushing that pbuffers did
require for synchronizing.
And of course,
we want to try and make our applications
as asynchronous as possible.
And then one really cool part
about framebuffer objects as
well is that they are able to
be used in sort of a trifecta.
Framebuffer objects with vertex buffer
objects and pixel buffer objects.
You can basically render directly
to a pixel buffer object,
use that pixel buffer object
as a vertex buffer object,
and you can do this all on the
GPU seamlessly without having
to round-trip any of that data.
But one thing to keep in mind if you
are going to use framebuffer objects,
which are much preferred over pbuffers,
but the one thing that's different is
although pbuffers work on everything,
framebuffer objects currently are only
supported on hardware that's capable
of running ARB fragment programs.
So that means like the
ATI 9600 and above,
the GeForce FX 5200 and above,
and of course the
Intel Embedded graphics.
So, those all support fanbuffer objects.
Finally,
I wanted to make sure that you guys try
and optimize for the user's hardware.
If a user buys a high-end graphics card,
you've got a very capable GPU in
addition to the capable CPU,
but you might as well try and take
advantage of that GPU resource for things
that might not even be related to OpenGL.
So if you aren't using much of
the GPU in your application,
try and offload some of that work.
There's some work being
done in that field,
like just a lot of research in
terms of trying to use these GPUs
for things other than graphics,
so check that out if you
haven't looked into that yet.
I wanted to talk about
integrated graphics.
So the Intel integrated graphics,
it's a very capable hardware.
Core image is capable.
It has fragment programming.
It runs all the really cool apps.
It runs like front row and the
little special effects when you
drop things into your dashboard.
It runs all those things.
But do keep in mind that it
does not have hardware TCL.
And so whenever you're doing complex,
if you're doing a lot of vertex
data or complex vertex shaders,
it will be going through
the CPU on those types.
So keep that in mind when trying to
create the content that you're going
to be delivering on those systems.
And then finally,
I just want to mention it does not
have floating point texture support.
Also, next part, I wanted to talk about,
you know,
now that we're shipping the Mac Pros,
we're currently able-- we're shipping
actually built order now with multiple
video cards in a single machine.
You could, in theory, have both ATI and
NVIDIA cards on your system,
and you want to make sure that
your application is able to
switch between these two GPUs,
say,
if the user were to drag a window from
one video card to the other video card.
And so when you do do this
checking to make sure you're
supporting both the video cards,
do remember only try and check
those capabilities once per render.
And I finally want to mention, you know,
don't turn off features just
by checking one feature.
Just don't turn off
features just by checking,
like, one extension or things like that.
If you're trying to use one extension,
check for that one in particular.
Okay, so before you guys go,
I've got a huge grab bag.
There's quite a few hints I just
wanted to throw out there.
And so I'll just take my go at it.
Let's see.
So vertex data.
For optimizing the amount of vertex data,
you want to try to minimize the
state changes that you make between
those calls to the vertex data.
You want to do things like
try and maximize the vertices
that you do per draw call.
Let's see.
Display lists.
Display lists are still useful
even though I've been talking
about vertex buffer objects.
Display lists are still pretty good for
when you have objects that are static.
And it has an internal optimization
scheme that it does that will
optimize whatever you pass it.
Well, not whatever you pass it,
but if you pass it some good stuff,
it'll be able to optimize it.
So for instance, with immediate mode,
it can optimize your immediate mode
if you pass it consistent vertex data.
So I have an example here of some code
that actually would not be optimized
by the display lists optimizer.
And as you can see here,
it's calling geo begin
followed by vertex,
vertex, color, vertex, and then ending.
If you were to try and
make a similar draw call,
there would not be a similar way to
convert that into a geo draw call.
What I mean by that,
this is a code that's going to
be set to one of those colors.
So instead of doing this,
calling this color in the middle of it,
we add a color at the very beginning
of it as well to specify that we know
what the color is going to be as we
enter that immediate mode drawing.
And that makes it so that that
second color call is acceptable.
is acceptable at that point.
Another hint, vertex data.
You can try and use degenerate
triangles to connect your strips,
your triangle and quad strips.
This helps you, as I was saying earlier,
you can maximize the
vertices per draw command,
and this helps with that.
Look it up if you aren't
familiar with that.
It's a pretty neat trick.
You can provide,
the most efficient method
I've seen of providing color
data is actually as bytes,
as unsigned bytes.
So when you're able to do that.
And finally, for your vertex data,
try and align it to the 16 byte,
because by doing so,
SSE and AltaVec can take advantage of,
you can do some faster processing of
that data if the CPU needs to work on it.
So, some grab bag hints for the tools.
You can find out where you
might be blocking in your
application by using Sharks,
Time Profile, All Thread States,
and also System Trace.
They work pretty well for
helping you find those blocks.
And also, my favorite way of doing it is
by using OpenGL Profiler's Trace,
and you can actually see
timings on a per-call basis.
So, if you see, for instance,
that your Geo Map Buffer is taking
a very long time at some point,
you know that you might,
and if you were not using the
Apple Flush Buffer Range extension,
and you see the Map Buffer's
taking a long time,
you know that the GPU must still
be using that data at the point
where you're trying to map it.
So,
you might try and push that Map Buffer.
down until a later point.
Another bit of information.
The driver symbols that you get
in Shark can often be misleading.
Usually you'll see GLD page-off buffered,
GLD get string.
Symbols like this,
those are usually false alarms.
And if you see a symbol in the driver,
keep in mind that it might not be
in doing the work you have because
obviously we can't have the symbols
available of what's in the drivers.
Also, some things to look out
for when you're in Shark.
If you see GLG process pixels, again,
this means that you're swizzling
textual data to something
that the GPU can handle.
If you see georenderer
float as a library,
this means that you're falling
back to the software render.
And finally,
with the multithreaded engine,
if you ever see
GLI finish command buffer,
this means that somewhere in your code,
you are synchronizing with the
multithreaded OpenGL engine.
So hopefully you can optimize
these parts out or minimize the
parts where you have to do this.
Some hints for textures.
You want to try and reduce the
VRAM to avoid any texture paging,
obviously.
But some ways to do this are by,
you know, you always want to try and
use minimal texture formats.
If you're only using, say,
8-bit per pixel textures
as your source data,
there's no reason to use a float
data as the type unless you're
doing some computations after
the fact that require that.
extra precision.
Also,
you can compress your textures at the
slight cost that it will take a little
bit longer for the GPU to render it.
Decreases the fill rate very slightly,
but it will increase the amount that
you can actually upload to the video
card by a large significant amount.
And then finally,
you can always use the shared and
streaming textures types with pixel
buffer objects and the texture range
stuff to have large textures simply being
drawn straight out of your system copy.
Finally, for textures,
if you ever have large textures
that need to be uploaded over time,
during a real-time application,
you can space out those uploads
by only uploading sub-images
of it using GeoTech sub-images.
Otherwise,
you may actually see stalls where
you have too much data going up
to the GPU in between your frames,
and you may see hiccups
as a result of that.
So with shaders, make sure you only
compile your shaders once.
And then try and use your attributes
when you're changing the data per vertex,
but use uniforms otherwise.
And then finally some
hints on compile time.
So again, use CGL macros.
Dave showed you it was getting
like 10% or 20%-- or excuse me,
like few percent increase in frame
rate in an application that had a very
significant amount of OpenGL calls.
And so if you can use that, great.
And then finally,
for your release builds, again,
never try and call a geo get
error in your release builds.
You can use OpenGL Profiler for that.
You can use it-- same thing with seeing
if you're falling back to software.
You can use OpenGL Profiler
for that if need be.
Try and minimize on your
synchronizing calls.
Also, if you're going to have--
make sure that your VBL is
turned on when you release it.
But you may want to have
VBL turned off for development
purposes simply for benchmarking.
But do remember that the reason that
people tend to like Mac OS X a lot better
than some other platforms is we tend
to make things look nice in VBL sync,
not tear.
And then also,
if you're using the OpenGL Profiler APIs,
which are basically there's a
header in the OpenGL framework
that has some ways that your
application can interact with OpenGL.
If you are using those,
try not to use those in the release
builds as every little bit counts.
And then finally,
just wanted to mention that if
you're profiling your application,
if you're in O0,
you may get different results.
And if you're, say,
in your optimized OS or O2 or whatever,
you may actually have
some release builds.
So sometimes you don't
want to profile that way.
So, in conclusion,
I just hope that you guys can move all
your applications to be using some of
the more modern techniques in OpenGL that
we make available on Mac OS X,
such as the vertex buffer objects,
pixel buffer objects, and texture range,
and also the frame buffer objects.
And I want to make sure that you guys
all use the tools because they are very,
very good at what they do.
And if you get good at them,
you can make your applications scream.
So...
More information, Alan is our 2D and 3D
graphics evangelist.
Also, we have Michelle Castajon,
he's our OpenGL DATS engineer.
We have a lab right after this,
an OpenGL lab that will be in
the Graphics and Media Lab.
And also,
a OpenGL Quartz Composer drop-in
lab will be tomorrow morning in the
Graphics and Media Lab at 9:00 AM.
So stop on by if you have any questions.